The Ones Who Walk Away From Omelas   With a clamor of bells that set the swallows soaring, the Festival of Summer came to the city Omelas, bright-towered by the sea.

The ringing of the boats in harbor sparkled with flags.

In the streets between houses with red roofs and painted walls, between old moss-grown  gardens and under avenues of trees, past great parks and public buildings, processions moved.  

Some were decorous: old people in long stiff  [stiff - жесткий] robes of mauve and gray, grave master  [master - мастер] workmen, [workmen - рабочие]  quiet, merry women carrying their babies and chatting as they walked.

In other streets the music beat faster, a shimmering of gong and tambourine, and the people went dancing, the procession was a dance.

Children dodged in and out, their high calls rising like the swallows' crossing flights over the music and the singing.   

All the processions wound  [wound - раны] towards the north side of the city, where on the great water-meadow called the Green Fields boys and girls, naked  [naked - голые] in the bright air, with mud-stained  [stained - запятнанные] feet and ankles and long, lithe arms,exercised their restive horses before the race.   

The horses wore no gear at all but a halter without bit.

Their manes were braided with streamers of silver, gold, and green.

They flared their nostrils  [nostrils - ноздри] and pranced and boasted to one another; they were vastly excited, the horse being the only animal who has adopted our ceremonies as his own.   

Far off to the north and west the mountains stood up half encircling Omelas on her bay.

The air of morning was so clear that the snow still crowning the Eighteen Peaks burned with white-gold fire across the miles of sunlit  [sunlit - залитые солнцем] air, under the dark blue of the sky.

There was just enough wind to make the banners that marked the racecourse snap and flutter now and then.   

In the silence of the broad green meadows one could hear the music winding  [winding - извилистые] throughout the city streets, farther and nearer and ever approaching, [approaching - приближающиеся]  a cheerful faint sweetness of the air from time to time trembled and gathered together and broke out into the great joyous clanging of the bells.  

Joyous!

How is one to tell about joy?

How describe the citizens of Omelas?

They were not simple folk, you see, though they were happy.

But we do not say the words of cheer  [cheer - подбадривают] much any more.

All smiles have become archaic.

Given a description such as this one tends to make certain assumptions. [assumptions - предположения]    

Given a description such as this one tends to look next for the King, mounted  [mounted - смонтированные] on a splendid stallion and surrounded by his noble knights, or perhaps in a golden  [golden - золотой] litter  [litter - помесь] borne by great-muscled slaves.

But there was no king.

They did not use swords, or keep slaves.

Yet I repeat that these were not simple folk,  not dulcet shepherds, noble savages, bland utopians.

There were not less complex than us.  

The trouble is that we have a bad habit, encouraged by pedants and sophisticates, of considering happiness as something rather stupid.

Only pain is intellectual, [intellectual - интеллектуальный]  only evil  [evil - злой] interesting.

This is the treason of the artist: a refusal to admit the banality of evil  [evil - злой] and the terrible boredom of pain.

If you can't lick  [lick - лизать] 'em, join 'em.

If it hurts, repeat it.   

But to praise  [praise - хвалить] despair is to condemn delight, to embrace  [embrace - обнимать] violence is to lose hold of everything else.  

We have almost lost hold; we can no longer describe happy man, nor make any celebration of joy.

How can I tell you about the people of Omelas?

They were not naive and happy children--though their children were, in fact, happy.

They were mature, [mature - зрелый]  intelligent, passionate  [passionate - страстный] adults whose lives were not wretched.

O miracle!

But I wish I could describe it better.   

I wish I could convince you.

Omelas sounds in my words like a city in a fairy tale,  long ago and far away, once upon a time.

Perhaps it would be best if you imagined it as your own  fancy bids, assuming it will rise to the occasion,for certainly I cannot suit you all.  

For instance, how about technology?

I think that there would be no cars or helicopters  [helicopters - вертолеты] in and above the streets;  this follows from the fact that the people of Omelas are happy people.   

Happiness is based on a just discrimination of what is necessary, what is neither necessary nor destructive, and what is destructive.

In the middle category, however--that of the unnecessary but undestructive, that of comfort, luxury, exuberance, etc.-they could  perfectly well have central heating, subway trains, washing machines, and all kinds of marvelous devices not yet invented here, floating light-sources, fuelless power, a cure for the common cold.

Or they could have none of that: it doesn't matter.   

As you like it.

I incline to think that people from towns up and down the coast have been coming  to to Omelas during the last days before the Festival on very fast little trains and double-decked trams,  and that the trains station of Omelas is actually the handsomest building in town, though plainer than the magnificent  [magnificent - великолепный] Farmers' Market.   

But even granted trains, I fear  [fear - страх] that Omelas so far strikes some of you as goody-goody.  

Smiles, bells, parades, [parades - парады]  horses, bleh.

If so, please add an orgy.

If an orgy would help, don't hesitate.

Religion yes, clergy no.

Surely the beautiful nudes can just wander  [wander - скитаться] about, offering themselves like divine souffles to the hunger  [hunger - голод] of the needy  [needy - нуждающийся] and the rapture of the flesh.

Let them join the processions.   

Let tambourines be struck above the copulations, and the gory of desire be proclaimed upon the gongs, and (a not unimportant point) let the offspring of these delightful rituals be beloved and looked after by all.

One thing I know there is none of in Omelas is guilt.

But what else should there be?   

I thought at first there were no drugs, but that is puritanical.

For those who like it, the faint  insistent sweetness of drooz may perfume the ways of the city, drooz which first brings a great  lightness and brilliance  [brilliance - блеск] to the mind and limbs, and then after some hours a dreamy  [dreamy - мечтательный] languor, and wonderful visions at last of the very arcane and inmost secrets of the Universe, as well as exciting the pleasure of sex beyond all belief; and it is not habit-forming.

For more modest  [modest - скромный] tastes I think there ought to be beer.

What else, what else belongs in the joyous city?   

The sense of victory, surely, the celebration of courage.

But as we did without clergy, let us do without soldiers.

The joy built upon successful slaughter  [slaughter - убой] is not the right kind of joy; it will not do; it is fearful and it is trivial. [trivial - тривиальный]    

A boundless and generous contentment, a magnanimous triumph felt not against some outer enemy but in communion with the finest and fairest in the souls of all men everywhere and the splendor of the world's summer: This is what swells the hearts of the people of Omelas, and the victory they celebrate is that of life.

I don't think many of them need to take drooz.  

Most of the processions have reached the Green Fields by now.

A marvelous smell of cooking goes forth from the red and blue tents of the provisioners.

The faces of small children are amiably sticky; in the benign gray beard of a man a couple of crumbs of rich pastry are entangled.

The youths and girls have mounted  [mounted - навесной] their horses and are beginning to group around the starting line of the course.

An old woman, small, fat, and laughing, is passing out flowers from a basket, [basket - корзина]  and tall young men wear her flowers in their shining hair.   

A child of nine or ten sits at the edge of the crowd alone, playing on a wooden flute.

People pause to listen, and they smile, but they do not speak to him, for he never ceases playing and never sees them, his dark eyes wholly rapt in the sweet, thing magic of the tune.

He finishes, and slowly lowers  [lowers - опускает] his hands holding the wooden flute.  

As if that little private silence were the signal, all at once a trumpet sounds from the pavilion near the starting line: imperious, melancholy, piercing.

The horses rear on their slender legs, and some of them neigh in answer.   

Sober-faced, the young riders  [riders - наездники] stroke  [stroke - инсульт] the horses' necks and soothe them, whispering. [whispering - шепот] 

"Quiet, quiet, there my beauty, my hope..."

They begin to form in rank along the starting line.

The crowds along the racecourse are like a field of grass and flowers in the wind.

The Festival of Summer has begun.  

Do you believe?

Do you accept the festival, the city, the joy?

No?

Then let me describe one more thing.

In one corner of the little room a couple of mops, with stiff, [stiff - чопорный]  clotted, foul-smelling heads, stand near a rusty  [rusty - ржавый] bucket.

The floor is dirt, a little damp to the touch, as cellar  [cellar - подвал] dirt usually is.  

The room is about three paces long and two wide: a mere broom closet or disused tool room.

In the room, a child is sitting.

It could be a boy or a girl.

It looks about six, but actually is nearly ten.

It is feeble-minded. [minded - задумчивый] 

Perhaps it was born defective, or perhaps it has become imbecile through fear, malnutrition, and neglect. [neglect - пренебрежение] 

It picks its nose and occasionally fumbles vaguely with its toes or genitals, as it sits hunched in the corner farthest from the bucket and the two mops.   

It is afraid of the mops.

It finds them horrible.

It shuts its eyes, but it knows the mops are still standing there; and the door is locked; and nobody will come.

The door is always locked; and nobody ever comes, except that sometimes--the child has no understanding  [understanding - понимание] of time or interval- [interval - промежуток] -sometimes the door rattles terribly  [terribly - ужасно] and opens, and a person, or several people, are there.

One of them may come in and kick the child to make it stand up.

The others never come close, but peer  [peer - сверстник] in at it with frightened, disgusted  [disgusted - отвращение] eyes.   

The food bowl and the water jug are hastily  [hastily - поспешно] filled, the door is locked; the eyes disappear.  

The people at the door never say anything, but the child, who has not always lived in the tool room, and can remember sunlight and its mother's voice, sometimes speaks.

"I will be good, " it says.

"Please let me out.

I will be good!"

They never answer.

The child used to scream for help at night, and cry a good deal, but now it only makes a kind of whining, "eh-haa, eh-haa," and it speaks less and less often.  

It is so thin there are no calves to its legs; its belly protrudes; it lives on a half-bowl of corn meal and grease a day.

It is naked. [naked - голый] 

Its buttocks and thighs  [thighs - бедра] are a mass  [mass - масса] of festered sores, as it sits in its own excrement continually.  

They all know it is there, all the people of Omelas.

Some of them have come to see it, others are content  [content - содержание] merely to know it is there.

They all know that it has to be there.

This is usually explained to children when they are between eight and twelve, whenever they seem capable of understanding; [understanding - понимание]  and most of those who come to see the child are young people, though often enough an adult comes, or comes back, to see the child.

No matter how well the matter has been explained to them, these young spectators  [spectators - зрители] are always shocked and sickened at the sight.

They feel disgust, [disgust - отвращение]  which they had thought themselves superior to.   

They feel anger, outrage, [outrage - возмущение]  impotence, [impotence - бессилие]  despite  [despite - несмотря на] all the explanations.

They would like to do something for the child.

But there is nothing they can do.

If the child were brought up into the sunlight out of that vile place, if it were cleaned and fed and comforted, that would be a good thing, indeed; but if it were done, in that day and hour all the prosperity and beauty and delight of Omelas would wither and be destroyed.

Those are the terms.   

To exchange all the goodness  [goodness - добро] and grace of every life in Omelas for that single, small improvement: to throw away the happiness of thousands for the chance of happiness of one: that would be to let guilt within the walls indeed.

The terms are strict and absolute; there may not even be a kind word spoken to the child.

Often the young people go home in tears, or in a tearless rage, when they have seen the child and faced this terrible paradox. [paradox - парадокс]    

They may brood over it for weeks or years.

But as time goes on they begin to realize that even if the child could be released,  it would not get much good of its freedom: a little vague pleasure of warmth and food, no real doubt, but little more.  

It is too degraded and imbecile to know any real joy.

It has been afraid too long ever to be free of fear.  

Its habits are too uncouth for it to respond to humane  [humane - гуманность] treatment.

Indeed, after so long it would probably be wretched without walls about it to protect it, and darkness  [darkness - тьма] for its eyes, and its own excrement to sit in.  

Their tears at the bitter injustice dry when they begin to perceive  [perceive - воспринимать] the terrible justice of reality, and to accept it.

Yet it is their tears and anger, the trying of their generosity  [generosity - великодушие] and the acceptance of their helplessness, which are perhaps the true source of the splendor of their lives.

Theirs is no vapid, irresponsible  [irresponsible - безответственность] happiness.

They know that they, like the child, are not free.

They know compassion.   

It is the existence of the child, and their knowledge of its existence, that makes possible the nobility  [nobility - благородство] of their architecture, the poignancy of their music, the profundity of their science.

It is because of the child that they are so gentle with children.   

Each alone, they go west or north, towards the mountains.

They go on.

They leave Omelas, they walk ahead into the darkness, [darkness - темнота]  and they do not come back.   

The place they go towards is a place even less imaginable to most of us than the city of happiness.

I cannot describe it at all.

It is possible that it does not exist.

But they seem to know where they are going, the ones who walk away from Omelas.

